Transcriber: Denise RQ
Reviewer: Alessandra Tadiotto
Meet Inook. He is a pretty happy guy.
And I'd be pretty happy too
if this was the first time
that my community
had just gained access to fresh water.
Inook is from the country of Malawi,
the small sliver of a country
in Southern Africa,
known as the warm heart of Africa.
Over the past 10 years, five million
more people like Inook in Malawi
have gained access to fresh water.
But what's unfortunate
is that this picture is a lie.
I'll come back to that in a second.
10 years ago, two Waterloo engineers
sparked a movement across Canada,
"Engineers without borders."
This movement was based on the concept
that it was completely unacceptable
that 5 million people in Malawi
did not have access to fresh water,
when us, engineers back in Canada
were working on problems
such as making a photocopier
increase its speed
from 149 pages a minute
to 151 pages per minute.
We needed to work
on problems that mattered.
I was fortunated, I found
the Calgary chapter here,
I got to be the first director
of overseas programs for EWB in Africa,
where I worked for 4 years,
and I got to work with hundreds of
businesses, non government organizations,
governments, all working
in this field of development.
It was really fantastic working for EWB
because even though we worked
on hundred-million-dollar projects
we had this philosophy
that if we were really going to understand
the problems in local Africa,
we needed to live like local Africans.
As a lot of ex-patriots
would spend most of the time
in the capital cities and boardrooms,
we'd spend our time in villages
learning local languages,
traveling on public transports.
And what this allowed us to do
was to get a really deep understanding
of what was going on at the field level,
And combined with this experience
— and hundreds of other EWB experiences —
we got a really interesting perspective
of what's going on in this aid industry.
The aid industry has got
a lot of attention lately,
economists have become authors
and have written about it
and there's a lot of controversy
about its effectiveness,
some even asking
the question, "Has aid failed?"
It's a very interesting question.
Now, I am confident to say
on behalf of EWB staff members
that failed or not, we definitely feel
that the aid system is broken.
And when I say broken it's not
what the media usually talks about.
It's not about corrupt dictators
or about corruption,
— those issues still happen in Africa
but they are much more the minority
than they are the mainstream today.
I am talking about aid being broken
in democratic elected, stable governments
with no civil unrest, countries
like Ghana, Malawi, and Zambia.
So I'll talk about Malawi.
The World Bank has stated
that 80% of the people in Malawi
have access to fresh water sources.
So one of our staff members
in Malawi, this is Owen,
was visiting one of those water points.
It was a gravity-fed system
that was commissioned
by the Canadian government
and finished about a year and a half ago.
A gravity fed system
is basically a bunch of pipes
that pipe water down
from an elevated region,
into a number of communities
where there are taps
and people can access that water.
He was going around turning on those taps
and some of them weren't working,
so he asked the community,
"How many of these are working?"
and they said, "Out of a 113, 81."
81? What's the problem? What's going on?
He found out that a lot of the pipes
had sprung leaks and had broken down.
All right, not a big deal,
pipes break down everywhere.
But the problem with this project was that
even though the infrastructure was built
there was no thinking about
who is going to maintain this system.
And some people took initiative
and tried to fix the pipes themselves
but there was a lack
of affordable spare parts available.
This situation is typical.
This is a graphic showing one area
of Malawi, I think it's an urban area,
where the green dots
are functional water points,
yellow are the ones
that are working but breaking down,
and red are not functional.
Hardly 80% and actually, EWB
has done some work and found out
that even out of those 80% coverage
of water points, 40% are not working.
See, this issue is
a lot of donors and projects
end up on focusing
on the hardware side of the issue
and not really realizing the importance
of the software side of things.
At first it's like ' "Wow, software!"
of course you have to do maintenance,
but when you think
about people donating into charities,
it makes you feel a lot better
if you know that your money went
to something tangible,
something like a well, a school,
something like giving a family a goat.
It's not as sexy and easy
to tell your friends about
how you helped fund a water committee
or paid for teacher salaries.
So when I say that this picture
of Inook is a lie,
it's not a lie when the picture is taken
it only becomes a lie,
a year or two afterwards.
When looking at this picture
one of my great colleagues said,
"Everything people see
from Africa doesn't matter.
And everything that matters
from Africa, people don't get to see."
And this problem goes a lot further
that just broken down water points.
Owen, after seeing this water point,
discovered not more than 30 feet away:
"Hey there's another set of taps
that look really broken down too
but they are not attached to the system."
And he asked the community,
"What of that? What's that?"
They said: "Oh, that's the American
government gravity-fed water system."
It was built over ten years ago.
He said, "What happened to that?"
"Oh, it also broke down
about a year and a half later."
How is it that a project
that failed ten years ago
was rebuilt [with] almost
the same technology and process
and had exactly the same failures
ten years later?
I recently joined a startup company
that sells goods online,
that uses a lot of Africa fair trade goods
sort of the ethical Ebay or Amazon.
And what we've learned,
as being a private sector startup
is that if we don't serve our customers
and we don't provide them the product
that they need, they won't buy it.
And if we don't innovate, change and adapt
to their needs, we go out of business.
So they have a power
to hold us accountable.
If we look to the public sector,
it doesn't adapt and change quite as fast
as the private sector, but, in the end,
if the elected government doesn't meet
the needs of its constituency,
they have a chance
to vote them out of power,
therefore holding them accountable.
But in the development sector,
if they don't serve the needs
of their beneficiaries
— and aren't only NGO's, they're
governments and businesses as well —
the beneficiaries have no power
to vote them out or to fire them.
The people who have
that power are the donors.
And when you look at the system,
you start to see some of the challenges.
Development is the sector
that focuses more on pleasing the donors,
and making them happy,
and communicating to them,
as opposed to understanding
the needs of the beneficiaries.
Because of that systematic challenge
is very slow to innovate,
there's very little change,
and you get exactly the same project
built ten years later that fails
in exactly the same way.
So what we do about this?
First answer is easy, we invest
in the private and the public sectors
in the developing world.
They are inheritedly structurally built
to be more sustainable
and to allow beneficiaries
to hold them accountable.
However, 70% of people
in sub-Saharian Africa
still make less than 2 dollars
a day, they are still in poverty.
And the reason is
because the private and the public sector
are not serving them appropriately.
So we do need to invest in businesses
and in governments in Africa,
but it's still going to take a long time
for the problems to be fixed.
Therefore it leaves us with the one option
and we need to work with this system.
Therefore we have to fix it,
to make it more accountable,
more creative, more transparent.
We need to start innovating,
coming up with really neat ideas,
ideas like giving beneficiaries
a chance to rate their project
using their mobile phones,
that donors and NGOs can understand.
Or moving our donors
closer to our beneficiaries.
Currently, only 20% of the Canadian
international development agencies'
African staff are based in Africa.
Ideas like funding development sectors,
like VCs Fund businesses.
What would it be like
if a donor funded ten projects
and expected four of them to do OK,
one of them to do fantastic,
and five of them to fail?
And not all of the solutions
need to be that complex.
EWB is working out on one
that's actually quite simple,
it's admitting failure.
My first project with EWB was in India,
where I worked with a bunch of schools.
Poor of the poorest of schools
in India, with the untouchable cast.
This is Bani, she was a girl
who was in one of those schools
and she and her classmates had to
spend from two to three hours a day
walking and collecting water
to bring it back to the school
so they could have fresh water to drink,
and for cooking, and the bathroom.
My job as an EWB was
to help solve the problem.
I worked with the communities
and their rain water harvest solutions
were to collect water from
the rooftops during the monsoons
bring it through gutters, filter
and store it for the dry season.
After a number of months I left,
we had our project funded
and was being implemented.
I returned back home
to Canada almost a hero.
My friends and family
were like, "Wow, it's fantastic!
You gave up your job in the oil
and gas sector to volunteer in India,
that's really inspiring."
A year later I contacted my NGO
to see how everything was going
with the rain water harvesting systems.
And they told me that not
a single one was still operating.
The reason was a lot
of them had been built,
but some of them had broken down
because there is
no maintenance schedule plan in place.
I've made the exact same mistake
that I criticized earlier.
When I thought about my friends and family
back home who thought I was such a hero
I felt like an impostor.
I thought of Beni,
I didn't helped her at all.
Admitting failure is actually quite hard
and I didn't tell many people about this,
and one of the only things
that helped me feel better about this
— and is a bit of shame to say this —
was that I started to learn
that other people in EWB had failed too.
But EWB have this culture of embracing
failure openly, letting us talk about it,
and was only through a bunch of us talking
about failure that we really got to see
we are making a lot of mistakes
and we got to see
we are making the same ones
and we can learn from them.
And we started to innovate and to change.
EWB is drastically different now,
ten years later than what we thought
EWB should be doing in development.
We don't build water points anymore.
As a matter of fact, we don't build
anything other that spreadsheets.
Now we have
this innovative marketing campaign
"Sponsor an African spreadsheet,"
because we understand that
the problems are not hardware problems
is all about that software side of things.
It's a really hard concept
to get across to people,
they still want to fund wells and schools,
but it's really about
the software side of things,
and it's a lot longer process to fund
those things; is not sexy, but it works.
So our staff members were really exited
to share this failure internally
but we still were not doing a good job
of letting other people know,
and some very courageous field staff
were getting upset at the management
because other projects were making
the same failures and weren't learning.
They pushed our management staff
— and we were nervous about it —
about publishing our failures,
but for the last three years,
EWB has published an annual failure report
sighting our biggest failures.
At first I was asked,
"How did your donors think?"
and I think how would my donors feel
if they knew that the money they've spent
and saved up, and generously donated,
had had no impact?"
And you know, that's tough.
Our donors felt that too.
But once they started
reading the failures,
they understood the power
of those lessons learned
and realized is an injustice
not to be sharing these.
Then we realized that no one reads reports
so we built a site, admittingfailure.com.
This is for all organizations to come,
and start admitting their failures,
and to start having
a discussion about failure.
The concept is catching on.
The Harvard Business Review
— just last month —
published their first review
focused on failure.
Two big companies lately
have also dealt with failure.
I'm talking to my friends
in other sectors and they tell me
not only the development sector has
these challenges, [it crosses to others].
Two companies had failures lately,
and what's interesting about them
is that one publicly admitted
their failure and talked about
what they've learned from it,
what they're going to do next time.
The other one tried
not to talk about it at all.
It will be interesting looking forward
to see which of those strategies works.
Firstly, I'd like to ask
people to think about
how does your organization
think about and share failure.
Maybe ask the person next to you
because it can generate
really interesting conversations.
And lastly, I'd like to turn back
to this question, "Has aid failed?"
I think I'll say that, for me,
the answer is 'yes, '
but only because it hasn't failed enough.
Thank you.
(Applause)